PDF page 2
Hello, everyone!
My name is Alex and I'm going to present difference logic.
In my presentation I'll go through the following:
  main sources that I've used
  definition of difference logic and some examples of DL formulas
  the job scheduling problem which serves as an example of motivation behind the difference logic
  general SAT checking in a nutshell
  how SAT checking of a DL formula can be transformed into a graph problem
  and conclusion in the end



PDF page 3
I've used primarily these two sources for my report.
The first one is the paper which shows how difference logic can be transformed into a graph based problem which can be solved faster than the general simplex problem arising from the DL constraints.
The second one is the chapter 24 from the "Introduction to Algorithms" which among other things describes the Bellman-Ford algorithm which forms the core of the already mentioned graph-based approach to solve DL SAT problem.



PDF page 4
So what's DL?
Difference logic is a special case of linear arithmetic logic, in which constraints have the following form.
A DL constraint states that the difference between 2 variables should not exceed the limit c.
Important note: a constraint has exactly 2 variables without any coefficients in front of them.
As we'll see later, such constraints ofter arise in timing-related problems.
E.g. x can be finish time of event A and y can be start time of event B.
Suppose time is measured in minutes.
Then the constraint says that "B not be delayed more that c minutes from A".
As DL is a subset of more general linear arithmetic logic, it can be also solved by general simplex.
However, as I've already stated, you can solve it faster by applying the special graph-based algorithm, which I'll describe later in the presentation.
First I'm going to show you some examples of DL formulas.



PDF page 5-10
phi_1 is an example of a DL formula where both numeric and propositional variables are used.
This formula is SAT and this is one of the solutions.
phi_2 is an example of a DL formula where only numeric variables are used.
It is also SAT.
One of the solutions is given below the formula.
phi_3 is another example of pure numeric DL formula and it is UNSAT because the following three constraints are contradicting.
If you sum them up you'll get the following inequality which is of course UNSAT.
Since this inequality is derived from the original DL constraints, phi_3 is UNSAT.
Later I'll show you how one can detect such a cotradicting set of constraints using the special constraint graph.



PDF page 11-12
Although, DL constraint must always contain exactly 2 variables, nevertheless it is possible to express inequalities with only one variable in DL.
How? By introducing a special pseudo-variable zero.
As you'll see later, this special variable zero does not change the SAT checking algorithm applied to a DL formula.
The inequalities of type "greater-than" and "greater-or-equal-than" can be also expressed in DL.
As well as inequalities and equalities.
Consider the following constraint as an example.
We want to express it in DL.
So what do we do?
First we negate the complementary constraint which is "v less than -3 OR v greater than -3.
Then we multiply the second constraint by -1.
And finally we introduce the special variable zero.
As you can see the constraints of the final formula have exactly two variables and the signs are "strictly less than".



PDF page 19
One of the motivations behind the DL is the job scheduling problem.
Suppose we have 2 machines and 4 jobs with known processing times tau (constants).
We would like to schedule our 4 jobs on our 2 machines such that the overall processing time would not exceed T (constant).
The problem can be formulated in DL.
Notation: variables are blue e.g. t1, t3 and constants are black e.g. tau1, T.
p are the propositional variables which show which job has been scheduled on which machine.
t are numeric variables which denote the start time of each job.
2 rules are important for us: overlap rule and general time constants rule.
the first one states that if jobs i and j are both scheduled on machine m then job i must finish before j starts of, vice verse, job j must finish before i starts i.e. time-overlap on the same machine is not allowed.
and the second rule just describes general time constraints that each job must finish before T.



PDF page 20-23
Bundling it all together:
  Each task is executed on at least one machine
  Each task can be scheduled on one machine only
  General time constraints
  No time overlap rule
will give you the DL formula for the job scheduling problem.
Once again: variables are blue and constants are black.
You can verify that all the constants are either propositional logic constants or valid DL constraints.



PDF page 24
A couple of words about SAT checking of a propositional logic.
It can be described as an intelligent search in the decision tree depicted on the right.
The tree can be quite huge, therefore SAT checker learns additional asserting clauses which help to avoid whole subbranches of the tree where no solution exists.



PDF page 25
This is the basic SAT checking algorithm for propositional logic taken from the SAT checking lectures.
It is also known as the DPLL algorithm.
The algorithm solves SAT checking problem of the propositional logic.
How do we solve SAT of a DL formula then?



PDF page 26
The answer is: we combine SAT checker with a theory solver.
SAT checker hanles the propositional part i.e. the boolean skeleton and theory solver handles theory constraints.
There are 2 approaches of combining SAT checker with theory solver: lazy and incremental.
In the lectures lazy is called the full lazy approach and incremental is called the less lazy approach.
On the slide the full lazy approach is presented when the theory solver always receives the full solution.



PDF page 27
This slide depicts the less lazy or incremental appoach when the theory solver receives a partial solution.
Now, let's take a look inside the theory solver component which, in our case, is responsible for solving SAT problem of a conjunction of DL constraints.
Why exactly a conjunction?
Because a SAT checker's partial solution corresponds to a set of constraints which needs to be satisfied together.
And "together" means the AND operator i.e. a conjunction of the constraints.



PDF page 28
As I've mentioned earlier, the SAT problem of a conjunction of DL constraints can be transformed to a graph problem.
We need to build a special constraint graph for a given set of DL constraints and try find a negative cycle in it.
If we do find a negative cycle then the given set of constraints are UNSAT and the constraints constituting the cycle form the explanation for the SAT checker.
E.g. in the graph on the right, the red inequalities form the explanation because they imply the inequality "0 < -2".
The constraint graph is fairly easy to construct.
You map each variable to a vertex and each inequality to an edge between the two variables.
The weights of edges equal to the corresponding constants.
Note that the graph is directed!



PDF page 29
Now, how do you find a negate cycle in a graph?
Well, the first idea is to check all the cycles and for each of them check if it is conflicting or not.
A cycle can also have a zero weight and correspond to a conflict "0 < 0" if at least one of the edges correspond to a strict equality.



PDF page 30
However, this is a bad idea because a graph can have exponentially many cycles.
Is there a better approach?



PDF page 31-34
It turns out, there is and it is based on the Bellman-Ford algorithm.
Given a directed weighted graph Gamma (which is allowed to have negative edges) and a source vertex s, Bellman-Ford algorithm calculates distances from the given source vertex to all the other ones.
It also returns True iff there is no negative cycles in the given graph.
Let me show you in more details how the algorithm works.
First of all, the algorithm initializes the distance estimates: distance to all the vertices equals infinity except for the source vertex, for which it is zero.
Then the algorithm tries to relax each edge |V|-1 times.
The blue code is called edge relaxation operation.
It is basically the update operation of a distance estimate of vertex y by using vertex x and edge (x;y).
Why exactly |V|-1 times?
Because it is the maximal number of edges which may constitute a path from one vertex to another one.
We have to assume the worst possible case i.e. that there might be a path from the source to some vertex x which has the maximal number of edges.
Therefore, in order to guarantee that the distance estimate for this "worst-case" path converges, we have to relax each edge |V|-1 times.
More details on that are given in "Introduction to Algorithms", chapter 24
As the last step, the algorithm does an extra edge relaxation loop.
If the extra edge relaxation is possible for any edge then there is a negative cycle in the given graph.
And if no update is possible then there are no negative cycles.



PDF page 35
The main paper, on which my report is based, during the run of Bellman-Ford algorithm uses the dynamic admissible graph Gamma_d to check if there is a negative cycle in the graph.
This graph consists of admissible edges which are the edges that can potentially be used to improve distance estimates.
The graph, as I've mentioned, is dynamic because its' set of edges depends on the current distance estimates which change during the run of Bellman-Ford algorithm.



PDF page 36
The approach present in the paper of Cotton et.al. is based on the following theorem.
Given a constraint graph Gamma and a series of distance estimating functions (d0, d1, d2, d3, ...), Gamma has a negative or zero cycle if and only if Gamma_d has a cycle under some distance estimate dk.
The proof is quite long.
You can read it in the original paper.
The intuition behind the theorem is that if Gamma_d has a cycle then this cycle might be used to update d infinitely i.e. the edge relaxation process will never converge which is only possible when Gamma has a negative cycle.



PDF page 37
PDF page 38
PDF page 39
PDF page 40



PDF page 41
Thank you for your attention
Feel free to ask me questions on the presented topic.
